>> Maximiliano Firtman: So
this is how the manifest looks like,
now we are going to write
our own manifest, okay?
It's not a big deal, and of course
we will go property by property to
understand what they are, some of them
are straightforward, some of them are not.
And something important is that on top
of the web manifest spec, there other
specs and other APIs that have appeared
with time that are adding more properties.
We will mention some at the end and
also on other courses
available at Frontend Masters.
There is one that I will
point later on hardware.
It's a tour of web capabilities.
On that one, we mentioned some of
these additions that you can add
to the PWA platform, for
that you need a manifest.
It's like plugins for the manifest,
they're not part of
the initial default spec, okay?
Well, let's try to do that.
So I'm going to BS Code now,
I'm going to create a file.
So the file can't have any name okay?
But I typically would call
this app.web.manifest.
BS code now automatically
recognizes the extension, so
now you can see at the bottom.
It's turning on the JSON parser by
default, so it knows where we are.
And also it, lets us start writing things.
So, first this is important, and
actually you won't find this
reference in a lot of places.
You should start with with an id property.
The id property was added.
It was probably three years ago,
which means not every PWA developer
realized that it's there.
I'll never explain what happened,
why it appeared in effect.
But now it's used by Chrome and also
it's used by Safari on the Mac and iOS.
The id is just what you think, an app id.
But the idea is to put a string there
that should be unique within your origin.
By the way, I mentioned origin
a couple of times at this point.
Do you know what an origin is?
Anyone know, just to be sure
that we are on the same page.
>> Male Speaker: Protocol, host and port.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: It's
protocol plus host plus port.
So httpsblah.com, on port 80.
That's an origin.
So it's kind of the domain.
So your domain.
So I don't need to say,
this is going to be called pathmasters.
I don't need to do that because if I'm
going to publish this on a domain,
that will be my domain.
So it should be an id within my domain.
So most of the time, if you will have
only one PWA, sometimes it's a pattern
these days to use a forward slash saying,
okay, that's a PWA for that.
But going back to the soda machines,
it can be just soda/267.
That's the id of that soda machine.
So each soda machine
will have a different id.
Okay, make sense?
That's the idea.
Let me go back and try to explain
why the id exist these days.
No one asked yet, but what happens when
we are in a PWA on an operating system.
Are we creating an executable
file in the OS?
Are we compiling?
Well, actually we are not doing anything.
The browser is the one doing things.
Browser has its own implementation,
and in most cases,
the browser is compiling an app or
packaging an app, okay?
The app does not contain our source code.
The app just contain metadata.
It points to the URL, okay?
But that app internally has an ID, okay?
And the thing is, for
years, let's open one PWA.
I mean, if you like coffee,
we can open Starbucks PWA.
By the way, the Starbucks PWA is
available on app.starbucks.com that's
the URL they're using, so
not star starbucks.com but
app.star.com that's the PWA
version of Starbucks website.
So if I open this, remember when we are
talking about PWA is everything that has
to do with debugging is
available under application.
So we go to Application, and
here we have the manifest,
where we can see the details
of the manifest.
And some they have some warnings there,
but we can see some details.
And here it says Computed App ID.
What happens?
Why it says Computed App ID?
Because Starbucks is not using the ID
attribute, as I mentioned before.
It wasn't there three years ago, okay?
Well, they didn't use it, so
Chrome had to create its own ID,
and it's creating the ID
based on the start URL.
It's a property that we
will have right now.
What's the problem with
the start URL as a key?
So think about database.
It's a table of PWA's, okay?
What's the problem of using the start URL
as a key that the URL sometimes has some.
What is this?
utm_source does anyone know?
I'm pretty sure you have
seen something similar.
>> Male Speaker: As a referrer,
like where it's coming from.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: It has to do.
>> Male Speaker: Not HTTP referrer.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: It's
not an HTTP header.
>> Male Speaker: But it's like words.
>> Maximiliano Firtman:
It's Google Analytics.
That's an argument for
Google Analytics, so Google Analytics,
then will treat this navigation
as coming from the home screen.
That's the string.
The thing is that tomorrow,
maybe you wanna change this.
You change the URL, and if you're using
the URL as an ID, we have a problem,
okay, because we change the URL, and
then it thinks, it's a different PWA.
Okay, you get it?
So if we change the start URL,
the problem is that Chrome will think it's
a different PWA, and then you will
end up with two installations,
the old URL and the new URL.
Well, to solve the problem,
we now have the id.
So you can have your own start URL and
in this start_url,
you can add as many parameters and
arguments you want and
you can change those arguments like from.
You can change those arguments
in the future without
any problem knowing you have an id and
the id is not changing.
Because remember, different IDs will
trigger different PWA installations.
Okay, make sense?
Why do we need a Start URL?
That's the next question.
Think about this.
Let's go back to a Starbucks PWA.
I'm in order.
I'm in, let's go to a hot teas and
I select a Chai Tea Latte.
So what happens if I install the app.
In fact, you can see this here.
If I install the app here, do I wanna
install the Chai Tea Latte as my homepage?
No, right, so I wanna install
the whole app, not the current URL.
So that's why, no matter where you are,
when you start a PWA, you define the URL
that you wanna use as your start URL,
not bother from where it was installed.
Okay, so now I have my PWA.
I can select a store, and by the way,
you can see I'm using the Geolocation API.
Look at the bottom.
I have the icon here with
the permission in the title bar,
in the standalone title bar that
looks really cool with the green,
with the Starbucks green color there,
okay?
So that's why we need a start URL.
If you don't provide the start URL,
you will have problems cuz the browser
will pick the current URL when the user
installs the app as the initial URL
of the app, we don't want that.
Another important thing is a scope.
Most of the time, scope, id, and
start-url they start as the same value.
What's the scope?
The idea is that everything the scope
is a path within your origin.
Everything that, if you make a link,
if you open another page,
another HTML, if it's out of the scope,
it will trigger an in-app browser.
We will see that in a second in action.
If it's within the scope,
it will treat it as part of your app, so
it will be rendered there.
Let me show you this.
So we are here at Starbucks, okay?
So if we change URLs,
I'm still in the app, okay?
But there will be a point
we can try to find one.
If not, I can fake it here.
I can click on Spotify.
So of course, that's out of the scope.
It's a link out of the scope.
So if I click here, just Spotify.
Look what happens.
So I'm still in the app,
the Starbucks app, but
where I have this bar,
this new bar here, okay,
this one that is not really
a full browser, okay?
But this is known as an inner browser,
so I'm still in a Starbucks app, but
Chrome is rendering a tab say,
well, it's a Starbucks app.
But you are just seeing here
is in a different URL, and
you can see the domain and the title.
Why is that appearing to reduce phishing?
Because, let's say you
have your bank account.
You open your bank, your home banking,
and someone is checking some JavaScript,
and it's changing the URL
of the current navigation.
You want to know that now
you're on the different URL.
Okay, it makes sense.
So that's why that happens.
So that's why it's
important to add the scope.
If you don't define the scope,
it will take the current folder that,
yeah, it's everything is there in
the root, it will work anyway.
But it's important to specify explicitly,
yeah, I do have a scope.
Then the other important two are name and
short_name.
By the way, in this session,
we will always use underscore
as a way to separate words.
The name is the name of your app.
It can be a long name for
example, I can call this is
the CodepadMasters,
the best notepad for your device.
So what's the problem with that name?
It's too long for an icon, for
the name that appears in the icon.
But it might be okay for
the alt-tab, for the tag switcher,
when you're searching the app, okay?
But not for the icon.
So that's why we have a short name
where we can say, I don't know,
CodeMaster, maybe even
CodepadMaster doesn't fit.
So, it depends on the device.
It's difficult to give you one rule.
But typically,
11 characters is safe anywhere.
Also, it depends on the font size of
the user but 11 characters is okay.
More than 11 characters, it might not fit.
But you can say, I don't know,
CM or CodePadM or
whatever you pick your option, okay?
So if I just say this,
I'm still not the progressive web app
because there is one more property
that is the most important property
that I have to set that says display.
And I said choose,
I need to set the value as standalone.
In a couple of minutes, we will see all
the possible values for that thing.
But that's the one that says, hey,
I wanna be in a standalone app, okay?
I don't just wanna be a website.
I wanna be a standalone app.
So if you save this, now, for example, if
I go to the iOS simulator and I refresh.
I still don't see any difference, but
if I add to the home screen share,
add to the home screen, nothing happens.
I was expecting to see my title here why?
I set the name.
I don't have an icon yet.
Yeah, that's true.
But I set the name.
Why is not taking my name?
Does anyone know?
Does anyone knows why?
There is one important
step that we are missing.
And I'm pushing your brains because
we have already seen that step.
How does the browser
knows that's my manifest?
>> Male Speaker: You have
to link it from the HTML.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Exactly
how to link it from the HTML.
If not, it's not gonna work.
So I need to go to my HTML and
typically in the hell, you don't need to,
but typically it goes there.
We are going to add the rel
manifest pointing to that file.
If not, it's not gonna work, okay?
It's not like the fob icon that it looks
by default for a file with a name, no.
So you have to link it explicitly.
So after doing that, let's go back here.
I need to refresh, reload,
so it should get it.
And I can try again,
add to the home screen.
And now you can see a difference.
I see CodepadM, so
it's kind of reading my manifest.
I don't have an icon, so by default these
days, iOS is just using your theme color.
And because I don't have a theme color,
it's just black by default, and
a letter with the initial of your title,
of the app's name, okay?
Before, that was two years ago,
it was taking a screenshot.
That's actually pretty cool to see
the screenshot, but they changed it,
[LAUGH] anyway.
So if I add it, I have an icon.
You say, yeah, but
that's a bookmark to your website.
But if I open this,
now I'm in full screen.
So I'm my own app.
So, just that?
Yeah, I kind of like that.
Trying to pull this over, okay.
So I have my own app on iOS.
Yeah, congratulations, you have just
created your first, iOS application.
Now it looks like an app.
We can still make it better, nicer, okay?
But just having this manifest with
just some properties, we have an app.
We are not passing
the criteria completely.
We don't have an icon for example, that
was mandatory and some other properties.
Something else that I can add for
now is the theme color, theme_color.
I can set any CSS color will work,
but stay with the CSS3 colors,
even CSS2 colors that are just
the name colors Or RGV.
So, don't use transparencies,
the new CSS colors that
we can define not in the RGV space,
but in the P3 space.
Don't use that because it may
work on some platform, but
it's not like compatible, and
you don't need to get into that, okay?
So for example, in our case,
if I go to style CSS,
I have a couple of CSS variables here.
So I can take one of these colors,
I know this one, or you can try with your
own color, if you want, doesn't matter,
and I paste the CSS color here.
And what's gonna be the change?
First once and
it's important I change the manifest,
should I see the change
in the install app?
I'm seeing a face of a clear no, but
actually the answer is,
it depends on the platform.
On iOS, the answer is, no, yeah,
you were right, but on iOS.
So on iOS, if I change the manifest,
it's not gonna change the icons
that were already installed.
On Android and next desktop,
it will update the metadata and
the icon not immediately,
it will take some time.
There is an update process.
I mean,
in an advanced workshop we can get there.
Hey, but
there is a whole algorithm actually,
if you go to web.devlearnpwa,
that's the book that I author.
I have all the explanation and
the algorithm, and
it's too complex to take
time right now for that.
But just to say that if you change and
publish a new manifest with new data,
some browsers will pick that change and
your users will get an update.
IOS, no, so in IOS,
I should delete the icon or
just install another one,
wherever you want, okay?
So I can go here, refresh,
install another one.
And now there is a difference.
I don't see the black background.
And now you see that color
is actually my theme color,
so you can see I'm matching the color.
So now the status bar also has that color.
That's the same color when you define
the theme color in JSON, that's all.
>> Female Speaker: This is only for
the manifest in terms of having to
re download the app for updates.
>> Maximiliano Firtman: Yeah, so,
the thing that I set for updates is for
the manifest, for the metadata.
So, if you wanna change the colors, you
wanna change the icon, you wanna change
the app, same, the contents of the app
has a completely different lifecycle.
And, yeah, you will be able to update
the contents of your iOS, okay?
So I was just talking about the metadata
and the icon that is installed.
That's the basic of a web app manifest.
And before actually seeing more
about the contents of that file,
it's important to say that there is
no standard way to make our content
available for example in different
languages using just the manifest.
So there is no way to use
the JavaScript internationalization,
API or things like that.
So the only way in case you want your icon
or the name of your app to be in Chinese,
in Russian, in English, in Spanish and
and so on, is to create different
manifest first and then change the link or
serve the manifest dynamically.
So server-side, using server-side
mappings or your server-side
language to detect the language and
then change the response on the JSON.